theory.7.adoc, before:

= theory(7)
Kylie J. McClain <kylie@somas.is>
:description: Theory is the package API for Mutiny systems.
:toc: right
:toclevels: 4
:sectlinks:
:sectanchors:
:idprefix:

== Name

theory - package API used by Mutiny

== Synopsis

This document aims to explain the API available for writing packages for Mutiny. This should be
considered the definitive document to consult when writing packages, or when developing package
managers.

The key words "must", "must not", "required", "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not",
"recommended", "may", and "optional" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119[RFC 2119].

== Repositories

Package managers *must* support multiple repositories. The internal prioritization of these
repositories is dictated by the <<priority>>. User-facing sort (ex. when listing repositories
installed on the system) is not defined.

Repository names are alphanumeric plus `_` and `-`.

The file and directory layout of a valid repository is as follows, _italicized_ items representing
optional items, anything else required:

* <repository name>/
    ** metadata/
        *** _dependencies_
        *** _summary_
        *** priority
    ** _libraries_/
        *** library1
    ** packages/
        *** openssh#1.2.3/ - This directory's path is exported as `${PKGDIR}`.
            **** _dependencies_
            **** _libraries_ - Libraries to be used for constructing the package's theory.
            **** _sha256sum_
            **** _sources_
            **** theory0
            **** _metadata/_ - All files under this directory are exported as environment variables
                               after importing all libraries.
                ***** _HOMEPAGE_
                ***** _LICENSES_
                ***** _SUMMARY_
            **** _files/_ - This directory's path is exported as `${FILES}`.
                ***** _patches/_
                    ****** _openssh-1.2.3-backport.patch_

=== Repository metadata

Repositories *must* have a directory in their root named `metadata`.

==== Dependencies (optional)

Repositories *may* contain a file in `metadata`, named `dependencies`. The `dependencies` file *must*
contain a single repository on each line. Repositories listed in this file are repositories which the
package manager *must* have installed prior to the installation of the repository depending on them.
The order in which they are listed is unspecified.

Any repository listed will have its `libraries` directory searched when parsing package files; the order
in which they are searched is determined by the `priority` value of the repository.

Do not add repositories to `dependencies` simply because a package in your repository depends on something
in another repository. The package manager *shall* deal with determining what repository needs to be
installed to satisfy a dependency through usage of the link:#universe[`universe` meta-repository].

==== Summary

Repositories *should* have a summary. The summary should be a short, one-line blurb describing the
repository's contents or objective.

==== Priority

Repositories *must* have a file within `metadata` named `priority`.
The `priority` file *must* contain a non-negative integer.

The intended scheme goes like so:
[start=0]
. First-party primary repository, over which nothing has a greater priority
   There should only be one repository with this level. (ex. Base packages for a system.)
. First-party secondary repository (such as a supplementary repository).
   (ex. Repositories containing software categories or projects; GNOME, KDE...)
. First-party tertiary repository. (ex. A distribution developer's repository.)
. Third-party repository. (ex. A distribution user's repository.)

=== Packages

Repositories *should* contain a directory named `packages`; if they do not, package managers *may*
ignore them entirely, as there's not much use to a repository with no package.

==== Package specifications

Package specifications (informally referred to as "specs") are strings which describe a package.

Specifications take on multiple permutations, because they are made up of four different parts, of
which only the name is required.

Given the fully-qualified spec `package#1.0::repository`...

* Package name (`package`)
* Package version (`1.0`)
* Package repository (`repository`)

// If you're reading this in the .adoc, remove the `$$ and $$` from the regex to get it unescaped.
For a package spec to be valid, it *must* match the regex
`$$[([A-Za-z0-9_+-]+)(#[0-9a-z\._-]+)?(::[0-9A-Za-z_-]+)?]$$`.

Breaking it down:

* Package name is alphanumeric, plus `_`, `+`, and `-`
* Package version is numeric plus `.`, `_`, `-`, and lowercase alpha
characters. (for `r1`, etc.)
* Repository is alphanumeric plus `_`, and `-`.

All parts of a package spec are case-sensitive.

===== Disambiguation

The only strictly *required* part of a spec is the inclusion of the
package name. If any other part other than the name is omitted, it will
be disambiguated in order to determine what packages can satisfy the
specification given.

If more than one package matches a specification, the package manager
*may* prompt the user in some fashion to be more specific.

=== Format

`theory0` files and `lib0` files are effectively just shell scripts. Package managers *should*
avoid locking the user into any particular Bourne-style shell implementation; as such, the format
of these files should adhere to shell syntax as defined in
http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/[POSIX 2016].

That said, a few exceptions are made for functionality that is deemed too
useful to be given up, and isn't yet specified in POSIX...

* Declaring arrays (`array=( "foo" "bar" "baz" )`)
* Iterating through arrays (`for item in "${array[@]}";do ... done`)
* Appending to arrays (`array+=( "xyzzy" )`)
* Local-scope variables (`local var="value"`)

== Build environment

When referring to a "build environment", this document is referring to the literal shell environment
which the shell process is running in. This means it consists of things such as variables,
functions, and current working directory.

=== Phases

Everything in this section is *required* of any package manager implementation.

"By default" refers to a package which does not define any phases or import any libraries which
define phases.

Note the difference between "not defined" and "does nothing". Packages *must* have each phase
defined, regardless of if they have any function; if a phase listed here is not defined by either
the package manager, or the package (or a library used by the package), the package manager *must*
error out and fail, because that is an invalid package.

"Does nothing" would mean something like `pkg_init() { true; }`. "Not defined" would mean no
definition of the function.
(ex. Attempting to run function that is not defined would give an unknown command error)

==== `pkg_init()`

This phase is ran when a build environment is created for a package building session. Normally
nothing is done, and this is a dummy function.

Examples of other defintions could be creating a custom `PATH` and script wrappers to be used for
build systems that are stubborn to cooperate with cross-compilation.

==== `src_fetch()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to get any sources needed to make the package being built. By default it
downloads any unretrieved files specified in the link:#Downloads[`DOWNLOADS`] metadata, and then
verifies the files match the checksums specified in the `sha256sum` metadata.

Usually you will not need to change this.

Examples of other definitions could include retrieval of `git` sources, `hg`, `cvs`, etc.

==== `src_unpack()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to unpack any files retrived during `src_fetch()`. By default this means
it will extract any archives downloaded into the <<Build directory>>, and then change into the
<<Work directory>>.

Examples of other definitions could include checking out `git` sources into `WORK`, or similar.

==== `src_prepare()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to prepare the package for the real build process; so, things which are
normally done before building, like applying patches, generating Autotools scripts, etc. are to be
done here.

By default it does nothing.

==== `src_configure()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to run package configuration-related steps of the build process. Things
like `./configure`, `cmake`, or writing build configuration files would be done here.

By default it is not defined.

==== `src_compile()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to run the compilation process for the package.
Things like `make`, `ninja`, etc. would be done here.

By default it is not defined.

==== `src_test()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to run tests for the package being built. Things
like `make check`, `ctest`, `./setup.py test`, etc. are done here.

By default it is not defined. This phase is special in that the package manager *should* make note
of this phase not being defined. The package manager *should not* fail when `src_test()` is
undefined; at least, not by default. Failing may be useful for quality assurance purposes.

==== `src_install()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to run the installation for the package; so, commands like
`make install DESTDIR="${IMAGE}"`.

Under no circumstances should anything in this phase touch something
outside the build environment.

By default it is not defined.

==== `pkg_preinstall()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase’s purpose is to run any link:#Package%20Triggers[package
triggers].

==== `pkg_install()`

*Only ran during installation.*

=== Package Triggers

Package triggers are scripts ran on directories or files being modified
during `pkg_merge()`.

So, in order to run a script when installing a package, you’d add an
item to `${PKG_PREINSTALL_TRIGGERS[@]}`. The contents of this variable
must be in the format of:

....
PKG_PREINSTALL_TRIGGERS+=( "mkinitramfs:/boot:/usr/${CHOST}/lib/modules" )
....

=== Directories

The only requirements of the directory in which a package build is executed is that it is read-write
accessable by the package manager, and that the work directory be entirely empty before any phases
are ran.

The directories in which a build is executed are undefined. However, it is a good idea to use
something located in a good location for temporary work. A directory in `/var/tmp` is a good idea;
`/tmp`, not so much, as build directories *should* be allowed to persist for long periods of time.

Commit message:

theory: explain why src_prepare() has no default functionality

theory.7.adoc, after:

= theory(7)
Kylie J. McClain <kylie@somas.is>
:description: Theory is the package API for Mutiny systems.
:toc: right
:toclevels: 4
:sectlinks:
:sectanchors:
:idprefix:

== Name

theory - package API used by Mutiny

== Synopsis

This document aims to explain the API available for writing packages for Mutiny. This should be
considered the definitive document to consult when writing packages, or when developing package
managers.

The key words "must", "must not", "required", "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not",
"recommended", "may", and "optional" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119[RFC 2119].

== Repositories

Package managers *must* support multiple repositories. The internal prioritization of these
repositories is dictated by the <<priority>>. User-facing sort (ex. when listing repositories
installed on the system) is not defined.

Repository names are alphanumeric plus `_` and `-`.

The file and directory layout of a valid repository is as follows, _italicized_ items representing
optional items, anything else required:

* <repository name>/
    ** metadata/
        *** _dependencies_
        *** _summary_
        *** priority
    ** _libraries_/
        *** library1
    ** packages/
        *** openssh#1.2.3/ - This directory's path is exported as `${PKGDIR}`.
            **** _dependencies_
            **** _libraries_ - Libraries to be used for constructing the package's theory.
            **** _sha256sum_
            **** _sources_
            **** theory0
            **** _metadata/_ - All files under this directory are exported as environment variables
                               after importing all libraries.
                ***** _HOMEPAGE_
                ***** _LICENSES_
                ***** _SUMMARY_
            **** _files/_ - This directory's path is exported as `${FILES}`.
                ***** _patches/_
                    ****** _openssh-1.2.3-backport.patch_

=== Repository metadata

Repositories *must* have a directory in their root named `metadata`.

==== Dependencies (optional)

Repositories *may* contain a file in `metadata`, named `dependencies`. The `dependencies` file *must*
contain a single repository on each line. Repositories listed in this file are repositories which the
package manager *must* have installed prior to the installation of the repository depending on them.
The order in which they are listed is unspecified.

Any repository listed will have its `libraries` directory searched when parsing package files; the order
in which they are searched is determined by the `priority` value of the repository.

Do not add repositories to `dependencies` simply because a package in your repository depends on something
in another repository. The package manager *shall* deal with determining what repository needs to be
installed to satisfy a dependency through usage of the link:#universe[`universe` meta-repository].

==== Summary

Repositories *should* have a summary. The summary should be a short, one-line blurb describing the
repository's contents or objective.

==== Priority

Repositories *must* have a file within `metadata` named `priority`.
The `priority` file *must* contain a non-negative integer.

The intended scheme goes like so:
[start=0]
. First-party primary repository, over which nothing has a greater priority
   There should only be one repository with this level. (ex. Base packages for a system.)
. First-party secondary repository (such as a supplementary repository).
   (ex. Repositories containing software categories or projects; GNOME, KDE...)
. First-party tertiary repository. (ex. A distribution developer's repository.)
. Third-party repository. (ex. A distribution user's repository.)

=== Packages

Repositories *should* contain a directory named `packages`; if they do not, package managers *may*
ignore them entirely, as there's not much use to a repository with no package.

==== Package specifications

Package specifications (informally referred to as "specs") are strings which describe a package.

Specifications take on multiple permutations, because they are made up of four different parts, of
which only the name is required.

Given the fully-qualified spec `package#1.0::repository`...

* Package name (`package`)
* Package version (`1.0`)
* Package repository (`repository`)

// If you're reading this in the .adoc, remove the `$$ and $$` from the regex to get it unescaped.
For a package spec to be valid, it *must* match the regex
`$$[([A-Za-z0-9_+-]+)(#[0-9a-z\._-]+)?(::[0-9A-Za-z_-]+)?]$$`.

Breaking it down:

* Package name is alphanumeric, plus `_`, `+`, and `-`
* Package version is numeric plus `.`, `_`, `-`, and lowercase alpha
characters. (for `r1`, etc.)
* Repository is alphanumeric plus `_`, and `-`.

All parts of a package spec are case-sensitive.

===== Disambiguation

The only strictly *required* part of a spec is the inclusion of the
package name. If any other part other than the name is omitted, it will
be disambiguated in order to determine what packages can satisfy the
specification given.

If more than one package matches a specification, the package manager
*may* prompt the user in some fashion to be more specific.

=== Format

`theory0` files and `lib0` files are effectively just shell scripts. Package managers *should*
avoid locking the user into any particular Bourne-style shell implementation; as such, the format
of these files should adhere to shell syntax as defined in
http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/[POSIX 2016].

That said, a few exceptions are made for functionality that is deemed too
useful to be given up, and isn't yet specified in POSIX...

* Declaring arrays (`array=( "foo" "bar" "baz" )`)
* Iterating through arrays (`for item in "${array[@]}";do ... done`)
* Appending to arrays (`array+=( "xyzzy" )`)
* Local-scope variables (`local var="value"`)

== Build environment

When referring to a "build environment", this document is referring to the literal shell environment
which the shell process is running in. This means it consists of things such as variables,
functions, and current working directory.

=== Phases

Everything in this section is *required* of any package manager implementation.

"By default" refers to a package which does not define any phases or import any libraries which
define phases.

Note the difference between "not defined" and "does nothing". Packages *must* have each phase
defined, regardless of if they have any function; if a phase listed here is not defined by either
the package manager, or the package (or a library used by the package), the package manager *must*
error out and fail, because that is an invalid package.

"Does nothing" would mean something like `pkg_init() { true; }`. "Not defined" would mean no
definition of the function.
(ex. Attempting to run function that is not defined would give an unknown command error)

==== `pkg_init()`

This phase is ran when a build environment is created for a package building session. Normally
nothing is done, and this is a dummy function.

Examples of other defintions could be creating a custom `PATH` and script wrappers to be used for
build systems that are stubborn to cooperate with cross-compilation.

==== `src_fetch()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to get any sources needed to make the package being built. By default it
downloads any unretrieved files specified in the link:#Downloads[`DOWNLOADS`] metadata, and then
verifies the files match the checksums specified in the `sha256sum` metadata.

Usually you will not need to change this.

Examples of other definitions could include retrieval of `git` sources, `hg`, `cvs`, etc.

==== `src_unpack()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to unpack any files retrived during `src_fetch()`. By default this means
it will extract any archives downloaded into the <<Build directory>>, and then change into the
<<Work directory>>.

Examples of other definitions could include checking out `git` sources into `WORK`, or similar.

==== `src_prepare()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to prepare the package for the real build process; so, things which are
normally done before building, like applying patches, generating Autotools scripts, etc. are to be
done here.

By default it does nothing.

==== `src_configure()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to run package configuration-related steps of the build process. Things
like `./configure`, `cmake`, or writing build configuration files would be done here.

By default it is not defined.

The rationale behind not providing a default definition is that it allows for more flexibility and
less package manager dependent functionality. Rather than putting a default definition that, say,
expects an Autotools like package, and putting that functionality in the package manager, it can be
done with libraries.

==== `src_compile()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to run the compilation process for the package.
Things like `make`, `ninja`, etc. would be done here.

By default it is not defined.

==== `src_test()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to run tests for the package being built. Things
like `make check`, `ctest`, `./setup.py test`, etc. are done here.

By default it is not defined. This phase is special in that the package manager *should* make note
of this phase not being defined. The package manager *should not* fail when `src_test()` is
undefined; at least, not by default. Failing may be useful for quality assurance purposes.

==== `src_install()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase's purpose is to run the installation for the package; so, commands like
`make install DESTDIR="${IMAGE}"`.

Under no circumstances should anything in this phase touch something
outside the build environment.

By default it is not defined.

==== `pkg_preinstall()`

*Only ran during installation.*

This phase’s purpose is to run any link:#Package%20Triggers[package
triggers].

==== `pkg_install()`

*Only ran during installation.*

=== Package Triggers

Package triggers are scripts ran on directories or files being modified
during `pkg_merge()`.

So, in order to run a script when installing a package, you’d add an
item to `${PKG_PREINSTALL_TRIGGERS[@]}`. The contents of this variable
must be in the format of:

....
PKG_PREINSTALL_TRIGGERS+=( "mkinitramfs:/boot:/usr/${CHOST}/lib/modules" )
....

=== Directories

The only requirements of the directory in which a package build is executed is that it is read-write
accessable by the package manager, and that the work directory be entirely empty before any phases
are ran.

The directories in which a build is executed are undefined. However, it is a good idea to use
something located in a good location for temporary work. A directory in `/var/tmp` is a good idea;
`/tmp`, not so much, as build directories *should* be allowed to persist for long periods of time.
